---
layout: post
title: Building Ubud Taxi Service
category: Web Development
excerpt: I recently visited the island of Bali (located in Indonesia). During my time there I met an awesome taxi driver named Dewa that was struggling to keep up with the changing technologies that his customers were using to arrange their transporation while in Bali. This interaction spurred me to create a website for Dewa to help him compete with the changing transporation landscape in Bali. Check out this post to learn more about the website I created and the process/technologies I used to get everything up and running.
---

<h3>Research and Design</h3>

After performing some basic keyword research and checking the keywords against the .com domains that are available, I found that “Ubud Taxi”, “Taxi Ubud”, and “Ubud Taxi Service” (and variations of these names) consistently score high in the keyword search rankings. The first two terms are already taken, but “Ubud Taxi Service” is available. I think this domain can reach the top of Googles search results if I focus on search engine optimization (SEO). 

I bought the domain right away (ubudTaxiService.com) and am excited to start and finish this project so I can help Dewa support his family. I’m going to start basic and make a slick responsive site. I assume most tourists are searching for cabs while they are on the go and that they don’t have laptops with them since they are on vacation. For these reasons, I will design the website for a mobile first experience (while still providing a great tablet/desktop experience through responsive design). 

I plan to break the site into 5 main categories: Home, About, Services, Photo Gallery, and Contact. 

A blog can potentially be added to the site if I have trouble breaking into the search results or if competition increases overtime, but based on the current competition, I don’t think this is necessary right now. 

I want to keep the design simple and easily navigable for potential customers. I think most customers will appreciate a well designed website and this alone could be the difference for which cab service they choose (I know when I’m traveling that I typically associate a well designed website with a well thought out and polished business model - this has proven true many times for me). Once I get a nice layout and basic content generated I’m going to show the site to Dewa, and then work on producing additional content and tweaking the site to include information about Dewa and Ubud. 

<h3>Coding the Site</h3>
I worked on the site for about 4 or 5 hours once I got to the Airbnb and pretty much cooped myself up in my room until it was in decent shape. I’m starting to add some basic content and am removing the lorem ipsum placeholders I started with. Things are shaping up quick and I could have a solid site ready to go live within the next week or so. 

I’m running into an issue where the placeholder photos from the “portfolio”/”review” section that are randomly generated by unsplash aren’t loading. I need to look into this or just download one photo and duplicate it for each tab so that it successfully loads and I can phase them out with the pictures Dewa provides me. I also want to change a few basic styling elements that are located at the top of the page. 

After getting the basic design coded up and layed out, I decided to implement a “hamburger” navigation menu. The menu I’m currently using doesn’t look very good and takes up a lot of space on mobile devices. It isn’t terrible but I think it will be a fun challenge to implement the new navigation style. I used a tutorial titled “Responsive Menu With Media Queries (Checkbox Trick) - Using Only CSS3 Tutorial“ from Youtube. It was pretty straight forward and I implemented it the same way they did, but I now need to go back through to cancel out some of the CSS Grid and other styling that was previously applied to the navigation menu. 

I put in quite a bit of additional work into the site and figured out the hamburger menu. I also optimized the navigation menu so its colors are slightly different than the rest of the page. I think this helps it stand out more. I added the navigation menu as a sticky to the top of the page and it stays with the user as they scroll down. I also added a bit of javascript styling so that the links are colored when the user hovers over them. When I added the sticky navigation bar to the site I also had to provide padding to the on-page links so the navbar wouldn’t cover content when the link was clicked. This all proved to be slightly complex, but it was nothing I couldn’t figure out with some thinking and a few well worded Google searches. 

After accomplishing so much yesterday I was ready to keep it going and continue fixing/optimizing things up today. I started by upgrading my hosting plan with StableHost and pointing the nameservers on NameCheap to the right location so my site would work. After that I started looking into very minor CSS changes that needed to be made. This included removing pictures that caused the screen to be “off-set” when things were resized with the media queries, and fixing the navbar so that its sizing was correct with the different media queries. I sent Dewa a message on WhatsApp when the site was live, and he didn’t respond for a bit but eventually got back to me saying to keep going for it and to do whatever I think the next logical steps are (in less words - I don’t think his reading/writing is very advanced, which is obviously one of the hardest parts of learning a new language). 

I guess he is a bit more excited than I initially expected. He sent me 10 pictures of happy customers and then a bunch of pictures of him and his children (which I plan to add to the about page). I’m excited to hook Dewa up with this website and I really think I can change his life/income drastically if I succeeed in my plan. I asked for captions/locations of where the photos were taken so I can name them properly and create alt tags for them. I could upload the images now, but I’d rather wait until I have the correct information (it will be less work). 

<h3>Search Engine Optimization (SEO)</h3>
The main goal of this website is to rank #1 in the Google search engine results for "Ubud Taxi" and "Ubud Taxi Service". The only way this can be accomplished is by performing SEO. Since the site is already live, I want to start working on SEO almost immediately. 

I ran a free SEO audit by SEOptimizer.com and reviewed the results. This didn’t provide me with a ton of new information but I was able to fix an error where multiple elements had the same ID and replace them with new classes that did the job just as well. After this I linked the site to the Google Search Console (which I have experience with from previous sites) and created a sitemap with XML-sitemaps.com

I love everything that goes into a website after the initial design is finished. There is nothing better than continually iterating through a design and optimizing for performance and visibility. I’ll need to wait a while until the search console has crawled my site and I'm going to wait to make any additional changes until then. I’m also going to make a github repo for this project (which I should have already done) and keep my changes up to date. 

After looking into how to perform a better performance/SEO audit on my website, I discovered a new site from google called web.dev. This site performs the same functions that the “Audit” tab of the Chrome developer tools does, but it packages it all in a nice format and provides links to help you improve your page. I ran the test and discovered I have a lot of room for improvement and I decided that I will fix all of these issues before doing anything else to the design/content. If I want to reach #1 in the Google search results, the site will need to be fully optimized. Since it will take a while to climb the rankings and gain visibility, I don’t think working on the content will pay off until this is taken care of. 

<h3>SEO - Content Best Practices</h3>

I learned a few new things while updating my web page to comply with the advice from the Google SEO audit. The meta description should be used for the page title and an accurate and detailed description of the page content should be provided. I also learned that using a canonical link helps with SEO and guides crawlers in the right direction while reducing confusion with the indexing of the site. Following Google’s recommendations from the audit improved my SEO rating to 100/100. 

Even though I reached a rating of 100/100 there were still a few suggestions and notices that I wanted to fix up. The first was the robots.txt file, which my site didn’t have. Although the site is currently only 1 page, I read about what a robots.txt file is and why it is useful to improve your SEO ranking. In short, web crawlers have a dynamic limit and you don’t want their limit to be wasted on unimportant or non-indexed parts of your site. I created a file which allows open access to my site, but I may need to change this as the site grows. I also performed tests for structured data testing and mobile friendliness. These both came out good so I can check them off the list. 

<h4>Page Performance</h4>
My site only scored a 76 on this section and I know it is a very important factor in SEO rankings. This is something that needs to be ranked 100/100 if I want to get to the top of the rankings and provide users with a smooth and hassle free experience. The faster a site loads, the higher it will rank in search results, and the more likely users are to stay on-page and not exit for an alternate site. 

<!-- insert fact or graphic about how many users are lost with over .5s load time -->

<h4>Defer Offscreen Images</h4>
Often referred to as “lazy loading” this is a technique that only loads images that are above the fold (images you will see when initially loading the page). You can use javascript to detect scrolling on the page and load images located further down the page when they are about to be viewed. Doing this results in a faster initial load time for the page, and saves user bandwidth until it is actually needed.

<h4>Properly Size Images (Serve Responsive Images)</h4>
This is something I had never heard of, but it makes a lot of sense. You should only serve the file size that is required for a certain view and there is no need to load a full-size image for a mobile version of a page. This seems quite complicated but I’m going to read through the documentation and try to find the best solution for this project. 

The documentation provided by Google was good, but not great, so I decided to turn to the trusty MDN web docs. Once I reviewed there explanation I understood how to solve the issue and used the src-set feature to set a few different image sizes based upon the width of the screen. Since I’m using Cloudinary for image hosting, I was able to edit the image src link to alter the dimensions. I’m starting to really like the service Cloudinary offer and can see how useful it may be in the future. 

Eliminate Render Blocking Resources



Ensure Text Remains Visible While Webfont Loads



Does Not Use HTTP/2 For All Of It’s Resources
I had never heard of this but found a way to solve it by creating/modifying the .htaccess file. 


After getting performance in a decent place, I wanted to add additional pages to fill out the empty links that are on the page. This consisted of adding “About” and “Services” pages. While working on this I realized I didn’t have a Favicon, and decided to focus on that before moving forward. As a web developer its important to use the tools at your disposal, and I found a site called “Favicon Generator” that made things very easy for me! I logged into my cPanel, uploaded the folder, extracted it, and added the proper code to my header file. 

Afterwards I created an “About” page and started to code it out. I had a little confusion with the CSS Grid settings, but figured it out after referring to the docs. Once I had things looking nice, I linked it to the main page, and tested the different window sizes to make sure everything was responsive and looked nice. Next, I will add the “Services” page, but this will likely be a “skeleton” model until I receive more information from Dewa. 


<h3>CSS Tweaks</h3>
While reviewing the page I noticed that when I hit full screen on my 13” macbook there weren't enough pictures to fill the screen in the gallery section. I added 2 more to fix this but realize there may still be issues on larger screens…. I’ll need to figure something out to combat this that will be “infinitely scalable”. 
